[WIP] Better Cobbler TFTP Sync (#44)
uyuni-project/uyuni-rfc: accepted/0000-better-cobbler-tftp-sync.md

- Feature Name: Better Cobbler TFTP Sync
- Start Date: 2020-11-08
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

More optimized TFTP syncing for Cobbler proxies. Switching from push to pull.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> For large scale installations Cobbler has proven to be a possible bottleneck. One of the problems is the Cobbler sync that, when using it in conjunction with proxies, also pushes the TFTP folder to the proxies. For installations with just one proxy and around 130 profiles the whole process can easily take up to 15 minutes. Not all of that is due to TFTP sync, but a good chunk of it and might force clients into a reboot, since information are not yet updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For large scale installations Cobbler has proven to be a possible bottleneck. One of the problems is the Cobbler sync that, when using it in conjunction with proxies, also pushes the TFTP folder to the proxies. For installations with just one proxy and around 130 profiles the whole process can easily take up to 15 minutes. Not all of that is due to TFTP sync, but a good chunk of it is. Note also that clients might require unnecessary reboots in case they are booting during the sync, since TFTP information is not updated atomically.
```

Does the above wording keep the original meaning?

> For large scale installations Cobbler has proven to be a possible bottleneck. One of the problems is the Cobbler sync that, when using it in conjunction with proxies, also pushes the TFTP folder to the proxies. For installations with just one proxy and around 130 profiles the whole process can easily take up to 15 minutes. Not all of that is due to TFTP sync, but a good chunk of it and might force clients into a reboot, since information are not yet updated.

Reviewer 2: Yes!
A real atomic update will not be possible in my eyes due to the fact that we would need to update the data at the very same moment. When having a few distros in SUMA or Cobbler we are talking about a kernel and initrd for each one, as well as other (smaller) files. But I am open for ideas.

For some files the Uyuni hostname needs to be replaced; this would be done right before delivering it to the client since etags wouldn't match otherwise.

Ideally a proxy would be "warmed up" after a few client requests, since most of the files are then cached on disk. HEAD requests are releatively cheap and reasonably fast. So the first clients would encounter a slight delay, but all of the following requests for profiles with the same kernel and initrd would have nearly the same speed as the current implementation.

Dealing with the thundering herd problem. Since it would be possible to have 300 clients requesting the same not yet synced, or outdated kernel, there needs to be a lock of some sorts on file requests. If there is a request to Uyuni server already running for the same file, there is no additional request allowed. Instead we'd just wait for the initial request to finish.

> One possible solution for the TFTP server would be [fbtftp](https://github.com/facebook/fbtftp) from Facebook. They ran into pretty much the same problem and created this dynamic TFTP server framework.

Reviewer: Cache invalidation is in general a difficult problem, so indeed we should be careful before embarking into the 'roll your own solution' route.

`fbtftp` looks nice, are there any alternatives out there, specifically (ideally) caching proxies?

I suppose a true caching proxy is not really possible as TFTP does not have HTTP-like `Cache:` headers, correct?

Reviewer 2: The thing is... In an ideal world we don't want to cache anything on this side because if the Cache is not correct (which is a situation which may occur), then the client would be provisioned with the wrong options. And yes TFTP does not have `Cache:` Headers afaik.

Reviewer 3: Splitting the architecture into "tftp to http proxy" and "cache" is helpful here. As already mentioned in RocketChat, using the Squid instance on the Proxy machine will provide for a local cache and since we're talking about serving "files" at the upstream server, standard caching mechanisms can be applied.
Looking at the typical content of the (upstream) TFTP server, you'll see either small files with individual configuration (which may change frequently and is each used by only a single PXE client) and large (up to "huge") image files, which will rarely change. Distinguishing between these two at the Squid level keeps the config file always coming from the upstream and the image files from the cache.
Of course, even the config files could be cached, but considering that the over-all workflow of client installation will typically require live access to the upstream server anyhow, and the rather small difference between checking for a new file version or just serving these <5k files, I opt for "no caching of config files".

# Drawbacks

* This solution moves load and complexity to the proxy.

> * Proxies need to have a permanent connection to the Uyuni server. If that cannot be guaranteed, then this solution won't work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Proxies need to have a permanent connection to the Uyuni server. If that cannot be guaranteed, then this solution won't work.
```

Proxies already have that requirement, so adding this solution does not really change things. I think you can remove this from the drawbacks, or at least mention it is not really making the situation any worse :wink:

* Proxies are pulling files instead of getting files pushed and start slow due ot empty cache.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

- Improve file transfers with rsync via HTTP. But there is no rsync2 Python wrapper. Not yet tested, but would have the same scaling characteristics as the current solution.
- Gzip for requests. Tested and only slighly faster with the same scaling characteristics as the current solution. Could be used in combination with rsync.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

- A note on _etags_. It would be nice to not have a database to track etag checksums of files. We need to check if etags can be calculated and calculated reasonably fast. Otherwise tracking etags in a sqlite database would be needed.

> - There are multiple ways to solve the thundering herde problem, but I have not yet looked into a specific solution. A queue might be reasonable solution, but also adds some complexity.

Author: Jens Mozdzen pointed out that we have a Squid on the Proxy. So we might not have to solve this problem.

Reviewer: We could leverage the existing Squid as the backend of something like `fbtftp` indeed.
